excerpt     Never-before-seen video released by the National Institutes of Health over the weekend depicts the psychological primate experiments the federal health agency has been conducting with taxpayer funding for decades.
text     Never-before-seen video released by the National Institutes of Health over the weekend depicts the psychological primate experiments the federal health agency has been conducting with taxpayer funding for decades.
Taxpayer watchdog White Coat Waste Project filed a lawsuit last month against the Department of Health and Human Services after the NIH failed to provide requested records and videos related to its animal testing. In response to the suit, the agency released footage to the group that shows distraught, caged monkeys chained by the neck being tormented with rubber spiders and mechanical snakes, objects they instinctively fear, in order to observe their reactions.
The primates used for the experiments, which have taken place at an NIH laboratory in Bethesda, Maryland, since 1977, first had parts of their brains “sucked out” or destroyed with toxins to intentionally worsen their fear. The brain-damaged animals were then caged and deliberately frightened with the fake spiders and snakes.
In the video, an NIH employee can be heard joking after one of the tests, “Where the hell is the dancing monkey?”
According to related documents obtained by the White Coat Waste Project, 149 monkeys are slated for use in this single project, which has cost taxpayers more than $16 million since 2007. Sixty of them will be purchased new, while the remaining primates were obtained through the NIH Nonhuman Primate Recycling Program, which transfers the animals from other experiments rather than retire them. Once the monkeys are no longer useful for the tests, they are killed.
In a statement to the Washington Examiner, the NIH insisted that "monkeys are used in research because of their marked similarities to humans with respect to anatomy, physiology, and behavior," but some experts say the experiments lack “any legitimate scientific, economic, or ethical justification.”
“The physical and psychological trauma these monkeys experience will not translate to improved outcomes for the real human patients that my colleagues and I treat for anxiety, depression, and other psychological disorders,” professor of psychology at Farleigh Dickinson University Cynthia Radnitz told the Washington Examiner.
“Human clinical research utilizing sophisticated, ethical, and cost-effective methods such as brain imaging, not contrived primate experimentation, is patients’ best hope for relief from the debilitating mental health conditions that they suffer from,” she added.
Other intramural primate experiments being conducted by the NIH, which spends more tax dollars on primate research than any other government agency, include forcing the animals to watch clips from “commercially produced nature documentaries” and observing to see whether they can tell the difference between photos of monkeys’ faces and pieces of fruit. Footage of these tests has not yet been released.
“Taxpayers should not be forced to foot the bill to fulfill the morbid curiosities of some out-of-touch NIH bureaucrats who want to destroy monkeys’ brains with toxic acid and torment them with fake snakes and spiders.” Anthony Bellotti, founder and president of the White Coat Waste Project, told the Washington Examiner. “No wonder we had to sue the NIH for the videos of this boondoggle. This is government waste, fraud, and abuse at its lowest, and it needs to stop.”
Lawmakers on both sides of the aisle similarly rebuked the NIH, with California Democratic Rep. Lucille Roybal-Allard telling the Washington Examiner the “disturbing psychological tests on monkeys” have “gone too far.”
Florida Republican Rep. Matt Gaetz added, “These ridiculous NIH primate experiments do not deserve taxpayers’ support. As Congress fights to reduce our nation’s $1 trillion budget deficit and set the NIH budget for 2021, I will fight to get this multimillion-dollar monkey business on the chopping block.”
PETA, which also requested the NIH records, "is demanding that NIH close this laboratory, end these tests, and redirect funds to superior, nonanimal research methods that benefit humans."
"While Americans wait for cures to deadly diseases, this country's premiere health agency is sucking out parts of monkeys' brains and then scaring them with 'snakes' and 'spiders,'" PETA Senior Vice President Kathy Guillermo said in a press release. "PETA is calling on NIH to shut down this horrific laboratory and retire the surviving monkeys to sanctuaries."
In addition to taking a long period of time to release records and videos sought via Freedom of Information Act requests, the NIH also has a history of violating spending transparency laws at all seven taxpayer-funded National Primate Research Centers across the country. Federal spending legislation signed into law by President Trump last year aimed to curb animal research and directed the agency to provide Congress with a report on efforts to reduce intramural primate experiments.
While the NIH claimed that "the procedures under question resulted in no harm to any of the animals tested," the agency did not immediately respond to the Washington Examiner's request for clarification on how inducing brain damage is not harmful.
comments     
