excerpt     US president to throw support behind plan to change rules that allow minority of senators to kill proposed laws
text     Joe Biden on Tuesday gave his most forceful endorsement to date of changing the Senate filibuster rule in order to pass sweeping voting rights legislation, saying he was “tired of being quiet” in a high-profile speech in Georgia.
In one of the most significant speeches of his presidency so far, Biden drew a connection in history between the civil rights movement, the 6 January attack on the US Capitol by extremist supporters of Donald Trump, and the unprecedented efforts in many states to restrict the vote over the last year.
He said America was at a moment to choose “democracy over autocracy”.
But despite the passion, some prominent Georgia civil rights activists, proclaiming themselves more interested in action than speeches, declined to attend the event in Atlanta on Tuesday where Biden and Vice-President Kamala Harris spoke and urged progress in Congress to pass key legislation currently stalled there.
Describing himself as an “institutionalist”, Biden, who served in the Senate for more than three decades, said Republicans had “weaponized” the filibuster, turning the US Senate into a shell of what it once was.
“We must find a way to pass these voting rights bills. Debate them, vote, let the majority prevail. And if that bare minimum is blocked, we have no option but to change the Senate rules – including getting rid of the filibuster,” Biden said during remarks at the Atlanta University Center Consortium amid a clutch of campuses of historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs).
He did not endorse a specific change to the rule but said he backed changing the filibuster, which currently requires 60 votes to advance legislation – an insurmountable challenge for the voting rights legislation given lack of support from Republicans.
Biden did not mention Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema, the staunchest defenders of the filibuster from the Democratic side of the chamber, by name in his speech.
But he made it clear his patience has run out after months of negotiations at the White House and on Capitol Hill within his caucus to try to find a way forward on voting rights.
“I’ve been having these quiet conversations with members of Congress for the last two months. I’m tired of being quiet,” he said, his voice rising. He also appealed to senators’ legacies, saying that those who did not stand up at this moment for voting rights would be remembered on the side of some of the most infamous racist political leaders in US history, including those supporting segregation or the Confederacy, as opposed to civil rights proponents.
“How do you want to be remembered? Do you want to be on the side of Dr King or George Wallace? Do you want to be on the side of John Lewis or Bull Connor? On the side of Abraham Lincoln or Jefferson Davis?” he said.
Speaking before Biden, Kamala Harris also countered Republicans who have repeatedly suggested that voter suppression is not a problem.
“Do not succumb to those who would dismiss this assault on voting rights as an unfounded threat,” she said, adding: “The Senate must act.”
Georgia was crucial to the Biden-Harris victory in 2020, with the state voting for its first Democratic president since 1992, driven by a huge turnout from Black voters whose rights are now especially under threat.
Chuck Schumer, the Senate majority leader, has pledged to hold a vote on voting rights legislation as soon as Wednesday.
If Republicans block the measure, as is expected, he has said that he will hold a vote on changing the Senate rules around the filibuster. It is not clear whether Manchin and Sinema are on board with the changes.
Biden offered full-throated support to two sweeping voting rights bills in Congress, the Freedom to Vote Act and the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act.
The former measure would overhaul federal election rules to guarantee new protections around mail-in voting as well as require early voting and same-day registration. The latter measure, named after the civil rights icon, would require places with a recent history of voting discrimination to get voting changes pre-cleared by the federal government before they go into effect.
Attendees included students wearing maroon-colored Morehouse face masks and members of Harris’s Alpha Kappa Alpha sorority from her time at Howard University, the elite HBCU in Washington DC.
Outside nearly a dozen people waved signs protesting against the administration’s appearance on campus.
The civil rights leaders Al Sharpton and Jesse Jackson attended.
But a coalition of prominent Georgia voting rights activists skipped the event and aides said the prominent local Democrat and organizer Stacey Abrams had a conflict and couldn’t attend, but did not elaborate.
Cliff Albright, a co-founder of Black Voters Matter, one of several groups that did not attend the speech said Biden’s speech was a “start”. “Needs to follow it up,” he said in a text message to the Guardian.
“While President Biden delivered a stirring speech today, it’s time for this administration to match their words with actions, and for Congress to do their job. Voting rights should not simply be a priority – it must be THE priority,” Derrick Johnson, the president of the NAACP, said in a statement.
Biden gave a speech in Philadelphia last summer on the need to protect voting rights, but it wasn’t until October that he endorsed getting rid of the filibuster for voting rights laws. Activists have expressed deep frustration that the White House was not moving aggressively enough.
comments     
