excerpt     When will the Derek Chauvin verdict be given? Jurors are sequestered and deliberating. Here's what to know.
text     What happens next in the Derek Chauvin trial: Breaking down jury deliberations and when jurors will reach a verdict
MINNEAPOLIS – The prosecution and defense gave their closing statements Monday in the trial of former police officer Derek Chauvin, accused in the death of George Floyd.
Now, the 12 members of the jury are sequestered as they deliberate a verdict.
Chauvin is charged with second-degree murder, third-degree murder and second-degree manslaughter in Floyd's death last Memorial Day.
If convicted of the most serious charge, Chauvin likely faces 12 1/2 years or 150 months in prison under sentencing guidelines for a first-time offender. But, the prosecution argues there are aggravating factors that require a longer prison term. That means Chauvin may face a sentence longer than outlined in the guidelines.
The jury may convict Chauvin on any, all, or none of the charges.
Here's what to know about the jury deliberations:
What happened Monday?
On Monday ,the jury heard closing arguments, where the prosecution and the defense summarized the respective evidence and witness testimony they presented during the trial.
Judge Peter Cahill dismissed two of the 14 members of the jury who were informed they were alternates and would not be part of deliberations. Cahill also instructed jurors on the laws they must follow during their deliberations.
Jurors must decide whether or not the government proved all of the elements of a given charge beyond a reasonable doubt. The defense bears no burden of proof, and Chauvin is deemed innocent unless convicted at trial.
Who are the jurors?
The makeup of the anonymous jury changed slightly with the dismissal of two alternates. The 12-member panel that is deliberating remains relatively young, with five jurors under age 40. Three are in their 40s, three are in their 50s, and one is in her 60s.
The seven-woman, five-man jury includes six white jurors, four Blacks, and two who self-identified as multi-racial. That makes the jury more racially diverse than Minneapolis and Hennepin County, where the trial is taking place.
Assault or 'reasonable' policing? Takeaways from Derek Chauvin trial's closing arguments as jury begins deliberations
What are jury deliberations?
Jurors typically retire to a secure courthouse room where a court deputy keeps watch outside. Although they have been together in court since the trial began in March, this is the first time they are supposed to talk together about the case and discuss all the witness testimony and evidence.
They are allowed to review any of the exhibits that were entered into evidence. The jurors have a computer that lets them review all of the exhibits entered into evidence. They are to send written messages to the judge about any questions that arise.
Who's on the jury? Here are the jurors who will decide whether Derek Chauvin is guilty of murder in George Floyd's death
What does it mean to sequester the jury?
During deliberations, the court provides meals for the jurors and puts them up in a hotel, where marshals provide security, The jurors are not allowed to discuss the case with anyone else or even with each other when they're outside the deliberation room.
Does the jury verdict have to be unanimous?
For a guilty verdict, yes. If jurors are unable to reach a verdict on any given charge, they will report this to Cahill. Judges typically instruct jurors to keep trying and to carefully listen to one another's arguments and opinions.
What happens if the jury can't reach a unanimous verdict?
If disagreements persist, the judge may declare a mistrial on one or more of the charges. The prosecution, in this case the Minnesota Attorney General's Office, would then regroup and decide whether to retry Chauvin.
How long will it take to reach a verdict?
Every trial is different, so accurately predicting the length of jury deliberations is difficult. Experienced legal observers told USA TODAY that Minnesota juries typically have returned verdicts with a few days, particularly if they are sequestered.
Last week, Cahill told jurors, "If I were you, I would plan for long (deliberations) and hope for short." Earlier that week, he told them to "pack a bag" when they returned to court the following week.
Charges against Derek Chauvin: What the jury is considering
Derek Chauvin is charged with second-degree murder, third-degree murder and second-degree manslaughter. The jury may convict Chauvin on any, all, or none of the charges. If he's acquitted of all charges, he walks free. If he's convicted on any charges, he can appeal.
Chauvin faces 12 1/2 years or 150 months in prison under sentencing guidelines for a first-time offender if convicted of the most serious charge. However, the prosecution argued there are aggravating factors that require a longer prison term. That means Chauvin may face a sentence longer than outlined in the guidelines.
Cahill told the jury there is no crime if a line of duty police officer uses reasonable force to make a lawful arrest. He instructed the jurors to consider the "totality of the facts and circumstances" in deciding whether Chauvin's actions had been reasonable.
A look at each charge:
►Second-degree murder is causing the death of a human being, without intent to cause that death, while committing or attempting to commit another felony. In this case, the alleged felony was third-degree assault. To convict Chauvin on this count, Cahill told jurors they must find that the former officer intended to commit an assault that could cause bodily harm or intentionally aided in committing such an assault.
►Third-degree murder is unintentionally causing someone’s death by committing an act that is eminently dangerous to other persons while exhibiting a depraved mind, with reckless disregard for human life. “The defendant’s act may not have been specifically intended to cause death,” and “it may not have been specifically directed at the person whose death occurred, but it must have been committed with a conscious indifference to the loss of life,” the judge said.
►Second-degree manslaughter is culpable negligence where a person creates an unreasonable risk and consciously takes the chance of causing death or great bodily harm to someone else.
Read more about the charges here.
comments     
