excerpt     White House confirms his administration is instituting a vaccine mandate for US federal workers – follow all the latest
text     Some of what Biden addressed in his speech today was a partisan divide between states and counties with high vaccination rates, and those with low vaccination rates.
The reasons people have not been vaccinated are complex and multifaceted, ranging from misinformation to concerns about paid time off. But one thing is also clear amid that nuance – there is a partisan divide, and it has driven hesitancy in places such as Arkansas.
Biden addressed some of that in his speech today, telling Americans vaccine development and delivery had now been handled by both a Republican and Democratic administration.
“This is not about red states and blue states, it’s literally about life and death, it’s about life and death,” said Biden, “that’s what it’s about”.
He said he had to “compliment” Republican Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell, who has been a consistent proponent of vaccines, and Alabama Republican Governor Kay Ivey, who encouraged people to get vaccinated in her states (while also divisively saying it was time to “blame” the unvaccinated).
However, even as some Republicans have begun to lobby in favor of Covid-19 vaccines, the rhetoric has been uneven in the party and comes after more than a year of downplaying the virus under former president Donald Trump’s leadership.
“I know people talk about freedom,” said Biden, referencing a frequent talking point for the vaccine hesitancy who identify as Republicans, “but I learned growing up... freedom comes responsibility… Your decision to be unvaccinated impacts someone else”.
Some major employers, such as Google and Facebook, have said they will require vaccines. But other industries and unions have approached mandates cautiously.
The American Federation of Teachers, which also represents nurses, said this week vaccine mandates must be negotiated.
The American Health Care Association, an industry group that represents nursing and long-term care homes, said in a statement it supports providers who institute vaccine mandates, but the pandemic has “exacerbated workforce challenges”, and that vaccine mandates could “further challenge” recruiting generally low-paid workers in the context of an existing labor shortage. More than 40% of long-term care home workers have not been vaccinated.
Biden implicitly acknowledged some of these challenges later in the press conference, saying, “a lot of this is timing”.
Side effects of vaccines authorized in the US are generally mild and short-term. Independent scientific panels have found they are safe and highly effective against severe Covid-19 and hospitalization.
Biden urged Americans to “Go get the vaccine now, now”.
Updated
President Biden announced a list of mandates and incentives to get more Americans vaccinated against Covid-19 as hospitals across the country see a new surge of coronavirus cases in a “pandemic of the unvaccinated” driven by the highly contagious Delta variant.
“We are not fully out of the woods yet,” said Biden, and later that hospital wards filled with individuals battling Covid-19, 99% of whom are unvaccinated, are “unnecessary, avoidable and tragic”.
New cases are not expected to lead to the same level of deaths and hospitalizations seen last winter, because 190 million Americans have had at least one shot. However, new modeling has sparked concern, as forecasters predicted 60,000 more Americans could die by mid-October, adding to the more than 609,000 who have already died.
Among Biden’s announcements, he said federal government workers will be required to attest they have been vaccinated against Covid-19 vaccine or get tested at least weekly for Covid-19. A similar standard will apply to federal contractors. The plan mirrors a vaccine mandate for health workers in New York City’s public hospitals announced last week.
Biden also said he would call on the Department of Defense to determine when Covid-19 vaccines should be added to required shots for the military; said the federal government would reimburse employers who give employees paid time off to get a vaccine; and that local governments should use stimulus funding to give $100 incentives to Americans who get newly vaccinated.
“It’s time to impose requirements on key groups to make sure they’re vaccinated,” said Biden. He later said he would like to see employers “move in that direction” of mandating vaccines.
The justice department has said vaccine mandates are legal, they have a history that goes back to the Revolutionary War, and have been required for years for some workers and schoolchildren for diseases such as influenza and measles.
Updated
China’s talks with Taliban could be a positive thing, US says
The US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, has said that Beijing’s interest in Afghanistan could be a “positive thing”, after China gave a warm and very public welcome to a senior Taliban delegation.
Nine officials from the militant group, which is eager for political recognition to bolster the impact of its military victories across much of Afghanistan, met China’s foreign minister, Wang Yi, in the coastal city of Tianjin on Wednesday.
Photographs showed Wang welcoming Mullah Abdul Ghani Baradar , the Taliban’s co-founder and head of its political commission, with open arms, then sitting down for talks with the Taliban delegation.
China hosted Taliban representatives in 2019, and is thought to maintain unofficial links with the group through its ally Pakistan.
Wang said the withdrawal of American and Nato troops, which will be officially completed by the end of August, “marks the failure of the US policy toward Afghanistan”. He called the Taliban “an important military and political force in Afghanistan”, and urged the group to make progress in peace talks.
Although the US might once have fiercely resisted Chinese attempts to increase their influence inside Afghanistan, now Washington’s priority appears to be staving off a collapse into full civil war.
Read more:
comments     
