excerpt     The former “Empire” television star was called by his defense team to testify as the trial entered a second week.
text     CHICAGO — Jussie Smollett was defiant that there was “no hoax” when he took the stand Monday on charges that he staged an anti-gay, racist attack on himself in downtown Chicago.
The former “Empire” television star, 39, was called to testify in his own defense about the January 2019 attack and vehemently maintained his innocence on day five of his trial in Chicago criminal court.
“There was no hoax,” Smollett told the court.
“What happened to me, happened.”
The actor, who is openly gay and black, described how he was walking home from a Subway chain to his apartment on a blistering night around 2 a.m. when he heard someone yell, “Empire!” and “f—-t Empire n—-r!”
What he saw when he turned around felt like “something out of Looney Toons adventures,” he testified.
“This person felt significantly larger than me. They were dressed in dark clothes, a ski mask and I could only see this area,” he said from the witness stand, gesturing to his eyes.
Smollett stood up and acted out how his alleged attacker came at him and how he defended himself by trying to take a swing.
“I would like to think I landed a punch but I know that I certainly threw one,” said Smollett, who smiled and giggled in response to a follow-up about his hitting accuracy.
The actor said his face was important to his role as Jamal on Empire, which required him to look like a “black Cary Grant.”
“I’m not a character actor, you know, if I was a character actor maybe it’d be different,” he said. “My character was a superstar, a pop star, a beloved GQ whatever, it was very important that I looked like a black Cary Grant.”
Smollett claimed that he slipped and fought on the ground for about 30 seconds and then noticed a second person, who he believes kicked him, before watching both alleged assailants run away.
He testified he was under the impression that the first attacker was white because he had used a racial slur and shouted, “MAGA country,” a reference to former President Donald Trump’s supporters.
Smollett said if his creative director Frank Gatson hadn’t called the police, he would’ve never filed a report because as a black man in America, he doesn’t trust cops and he was also concerned about looking weak.
“I am also a well-known figure at that time and I’m an openly gay man. I’m an actor, I want to play a boxer, I want to play a superhero, I want to blow stuff up,” he said.
“The moment I got beat I became a f—t who got his ass whooped.”
Smollett, dressed in the same outfit he wore on day three of the trial — a dark blue suit, light blue shirt and a burgundy tie — testified for more than five hours and kept a cool demeanor while his lead defense attorney Nenye Uche peppered him with questions. He spoke comfortably about his career in show business, name dropped numerous high profile individuals and at times, answered flippantly when he made jokes about driving and texting while stoned and how good of a punch he can throw.
He compared testifying at one point to being in the VIP section at clubs and said it felt like being a “monkey in a cage.”
“You’re just in a box with everybody looking at you,” he told jurors.
Prosecutors allege the attack Smollett described was actually a staged hoax that he paid two brothers, Abimbola and Olabinjo Osundairo, $3,500 to carry out to get attention on the set of “Empire.”
Smollett insisted on Monday that the check he’d given Abimbola, which prosecutors claim is proof that he paid him to carry out the attack, was for fitness and nutritional coaching — nothing more.
“Basically I turned to him and said you should just be my trainer… He agreed,” Smollet said. “I think I took my shirt off and showed him my little fat belly and he said, you know, he could do it.”
Smollett claimed that Abimola had offered to get him an herbal steroid that’s illegal in the US to help with his weight loss and the infamous text message he sent him that prosecutors said was proof he staged the crime — “might need your help on the low” — was in regards to the drug.
During a January 27th meeting that the Osundairos’ alleged was a “dress rehearsal” for the hate crime hoax, Smollett testified he had a workout session planned with Abimbola that day and used the opportunity to give him the check for his personal training services.
Smollett claimed that he picked up the two brothers and they ended up just driving around smoking blunts before he dropped them both off.
The defense has suggested the Osundairo brothers were motivated to attack Smollett and accuse him of staging the hoax for a number of reasons. They have asserted the brothers are homophobic, wanted to scare Smollett into needing pricey, personal security services and wanted to avoid charges for committing a hate crime.
They also claimed the brothers later saw an opportunity to make money — and told Smollett they’d be willing to “make this all go away” and not testify against him if he agreed to pay them $1 million each.
Prosecutors, however, say that the brothers were just trying to help Smollett out in the hopes he’d further their own budding acting careers and they felt indebted to him after the actor helped Abimbola get a better role on the set of “Empire.”
During his testimony Monday, Smollett talked about his drug-fueled partying lifestyle and revealed he and Abimbola did cocaine together and hooked up on the first night they met at a club in the fall of 2017.
“We were in a club, you go to the bathroom, go to a stall, do a bump, do a bump and then just kind of keep going in and then we went to the bathhouse,” Smollet said, referring to the gay spa Steamworks.
While at the bathouse in Chicago’s Boystown neighborhood, the pair went into a private room where there was gay pornography on the screens, Smollett said.
“We did more drugs and made out,” Smollet said, adding that there was “touching and things like that” but that the sexual encounter didn’t go further until their next trip to the bathhouse.
During that encounter, Smollett testified they pleasured themselves.
“We went alone this time. We got a private room again, we did drugs and made out a little bit and this time, we masturbated together,” he said.
Last week, Abimbola was called to testify as the prosecution’s star witness and said under oath that he was heterosexual and he and Smollett never had a sexual relationship together. He was also asked about whether or not they’d pleasured themselves together at Steamworks and Abimbola denied it, but did acknowledge they’d gone to the spa together in the past.
Smollett testified that on the night of their second bathhouse visit, he met Osundairo’s older brother, Olabinjo, at a female strip club earlier in the evening.
“[Abimbola] was whispering like, ‘lets make a break’ and we left,” Smollett recalled.
When asked about whether Olabinjo knew about the spa escapades, Smollet said, “The assumption was, of course he didn’t because we had to sneak out.”
The actor claimed that he was embarrassed about the lifestyle he led when he was asked by his attorney if he regretted his drug use.
“Of course, I’m sitting here in front of a jury, in front of my mom having to explain it,” he said.
Smollett appeared mostly calm and confident when Uche questioned him about his rise to fame on “Empire”, his childhood and the night of the alleged attack but while under cross examination by special prosecutor Dan Webb, he grew emotional when denying the allegations.
“I have such an issue with people who weaponize sexuality, so that’s just not my scene, that’s just not how I roll,” he said.
“I told them the truth, that I was the victim of a hate crime.”
Webb referenced testimony from the emergency room doctor who treated Smollett and found he didn’t suffer serious injuries, drawing an emotional response from the actor who said his injuries were “absolutely” “significant.”
“I have a scar that has not healed under my right eye, three years later I have blackness around my left eye that has not healed… my injuries were real,” he barked.
Last week, detectives from the Chicago Police Department testified about Smollett’s reluctance to hand over his phone records, medical reports and a DNA swab and Webb zeroed in on that late Monday, asking why he didn’t cooperate fully.
“I cared more about my privacy and that’s the truth,” Smollett said.
He added that he was wary of providing information to the police after numerous “leaks” about the case came out and he received a text message from CNN host Don Lemon who told him cops said they didn’t believe the actor’s story.
Smollett also disputed the officers’ testimony and said he was only asked for phone records from an hour before and an hour after the attack — not his complete phone data.
“I’m not here to judge that,” Smollett said when asked if the officers gave false testimony.
Webb cross-examined Smollett for an hour before the case broke for the evening and will continue his examination on Tuesday.
The actor is facing six felony counts of disorderly conduct for lying to police and if convicted, faces up to three years in jail.
comments     
